We're not doing any of these parts yet,
cuz we haven't written that code.
That code's a bit more complicated,
but we'll tackle that in a second.
But we just know that we got 6 hops.
And I want you to notice something
that I didn't tell you about before.
But I inserted into this exercise
a little bit of rudimentary
performance benchmarking.
It's very, very crude.
But notice that that operation took us
0.3 milliseconds, it's pretty quick.
You can probably imagine
that as we increase
the number of hops,
starts to take longer, right?
So I went from 10 to 11.
I want you to see what happens from 2.7
to, that was probably not a good example.
I think the other one was an outlier.
Let's go from 12 to 30.
Actually, I know that this doesn't
start to really show up until we're at
a slightly higher number,
so I'm gonna start at 20.
That was 0.19 seconds,
that's 190 milliseconds.
What happens when I go to 21?
So we went from 0.19 to 0.46, that's
a little bit more than double, isn't it?
What happens when I go from 21 to 22,
any predictions?
0.94, a little bit more than double.
23?
A little bit more than double.
You spotting a pattern here?
It's doubling a little bit
more than doubling each time.
We have a word for this in computer
science, we call this exponential growth.
It's problematic, isn't it?
We're only 23 hops, and we're already
taking 2.31 physical seconds.
What do you predict is
gonna happen when I do 24?
What's it gonna be?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Approximately 5, maybe 5.2,
5.3 seconds, we'll see.
It's painful to wait.
Slightly less than that, all right.
My math wasn't graded estimating.
Where are we gonna be here,
a little bit over ten seconds maybe,
maybe slightly over ten seconds?
We'll wait the ten seconds,
it's worth it just to prove it.
I'm not gonna go any further than the ten
seconds, but I think you get the point.
It's steadily growing slightly more than
exponential was up to 12, all right?
So we have a working solution
that's completely impractical for
any arbitrarily large datasets.
This is where the theoretical
math starts to kick in.
It's where the theorist theoretical
gist of the algorithmic job kicks in.
Because we could have looked at the code
before we ever ran any tests and
known that this was gonna be true.
And I wanna help you see that,
I wanna help you understand that.
So I'm gonna go back to the slides.
In fact, it is an o(n) of not 2 to the n,
which is exponential,
but 2.222 repeating forever to the n,
which is slightly more
than doubling each time.
And how do I know that it's 2.222?
Well, I can actually do the math,
because I read this.
But there's another way that
later we'll come back to, and
we'll see that 2.22 coming back to us.
There's another way of verifying that, but
I'll just give you a quick little preview.
If you think about all of the places
that I can go from any digit.
Some of the digits have
two places that I can go.
Some of them have three
places that I can go, right?
If you average out the number of
places on average that I can go,
guess what the average is?
>> 2.22.
>> 2.22, and there bears out for us.
It's rare, actually, that we get something
that is so crystal clear the empirical
evidence that we have matching with
the theoretical theory that we have.
But we could have looked
at this problem and
said even before I ran it the first time,
I could have said I know for
a fact this code is going to run at
slightly above exponential growth.
You follow me,
cuz I can just look at what it's doing.
I know that it's doing for everything,
it's doing an average of 2.22 more things,
so it's definitely going to grow
slightly more than exponential.
We call this exponential.
Now, I've used a couple
of different terms.
I've used constant, I've used linear,
I've used exponential.
What are these?
These are ways of articulating
the severity of the equation,
the theoretical worst case growth.
This is a chart that I stole
directly off of bigocheatsheet.com.
You should totally go to that website.
It's got a lot of great
information about this.
So it's good foundational material and
back reading.
But I want you to look at,
I've listed up there on the top,
we've got starting from the top,
we have kind of the worst of the Big-O's.
At least the worst of the most
commonly named Big-O's,
all the way down to the bottom,
constant being the best.
So we have constant time is awesome.
Again, technically the best is zero,
cuz we never did it.
But if you have to do some work,
the best growth is the growth that
never grows because it just flatlines.
That's that black line
there at the bottom.
Or, the next step up is
what we call logarithmic.
That's that darker green.
It's almost horizontal, isn't it?
No matter how far out we go,
it's almost horizontal.
There's barely any growth at all.
And then we have the o(n)
is up there at that line,
you see that it kind of steadily grows up.
It's not growing super fast,
but it's growing in a line.
Then you look up at o(n) log(n),
that's what we call linear logarithmic.
So it's ever so
slightly starting to bend up.
It kinda looks mostly like a line,
but it's starting to bend up, and
the further up you go, the higher
it's gonna get quicker and quicker.
It's going a little bit faster than o(n),
actually, fairly faster.
We're into that orange,
that's kinda that warning sign.
If you're in this area,
you should be a little bit concerned that
maybe it might not be
practical in production.
Once you get into the red,
you're almost never gonna see one of those
deployed in production unless you have
a pretty fixed constraint on your problem
set where you know it doesn't matter.
It could grow of n squared because n
never gets above 5, big deal, right?
But if n can ever get out of our control,
then we have to be really
concerned about it.
So we have o(n) squared,
which is our exponential.
I'm sorry, that's our poly.
I just did it.
I was about to tell you,
I always mix this up.
That's polygnomic n squared.
And then we have 2 to the n.
That's the very close one
that we just looked at.
That's exponential.
Polynomic and exponential,
n squared, 2 to the n,
I always mix these two up,
and I did it just there.
I was even trying not to mix it up,
and then I mixed it up.
N squared is polynomic, same thing with
n cubed, or n to the 4th, or whatever.
2 to the n, or 3 to the n, or
4 to the n, or 2.222 to the n,
that's called exponential.
And then the worst of all is factorials.
And there are technically
worse than factorial, but
they don't really go by
any commonly known names.
So these are the commonly known names
that you need to be familiar with.
If you're gonna speak, computer scientist,
you're gonna speak algorithm,
you need to be able to say.
Yeah, I think my algorithm grows that
linear logarithmic, or I think it's
exponential, or I think it's polynomial,
or I'm pretty sure it's constant.
You need to be able to say
those kinds of things.
Remember that these
are an estimate of the worst case.
A lot of times,
we like to code based on, well,
I'm pretty sure that in the average case,
it's gonna do great.
And the algorithmist is gonna
look back at you and say,
I don't really care what
the average case is.
What I care about is is this gonna
crash because in the worst case it is
exponential, and it takes you
a thousand minutes to run or something.
Here's a true story on this.
Way back earlier in my career, almost 20
years, certainly more than 15 years ago,
very early on in my career, one of
the jobs that I took was as, my job title,
it sounds better than it was, but my job
title was user experience architect.
And I did not work in
the engineering department,
I actually reported directly to the
product manager for a software company.
And my job was to design and
prototype out and do user testing of
interfaces and ways to interface
in our enterprise software.
And then to develop that hand those
designs and those prototypes and
the tests off to the engineering
department who then implemented it.
And then I had to work with QA to
make sure that they did it right,
that they implemented what we
had designed and tested it.
All right, so that was my job.
So I didn't report to
the engineering director, but
I worked closely with them to make
sure that they implemented it.
That's how in theory it worked,
here's how in practice it worked.
Nine times out of ten, they took my code
and just dropped it into production.
So I knew that I did need to be careful
because they were more likely to just,
we're all lazy as engineers,
right, lazy as engineers.
If it looks good enough, just drop it in.
Why re-implement it, right?
So I knew that there was a bit
of an additional responsibility
that I had to make sure I didn't
just hand off really terrible code.
Well, we had this feature that
they wanted me to design.
And it was effectively a multi-column
sorting kind of a thing on this
particular data table.
And so I wrote up some quick code for it.
That was n squared, it was polynomial.
I don't think it was exponential,
it was polynomial in its theoretical
growth to do this
multi-column sorting thing.
It's very quick and dirty code,
and I put it was maybe,
I feel like it was maybe about 10 or
15 lines of my code, and
I probably wrote double that in code
comments, in all capital characters
saying this code should absolutely
positively never go to production.
This is the prototype, and
it's being tested on a data set
that is a max of 15 elements.
But we don't know what our customers
are gonna do with this, and
our customers could have thousands or
tens of thousands, right?
I put all this out in the code comments.
I told my boss, I was like,
I don't have time to go write
the correct version of this.
We need to ship this feature.
But this is our prototyping that
we've user experience tested, and
it works well in the small.
But if they just took my code and
shipped it, that would be bad.
You probably can tell
where this story is going,
because there was a lot of
pressure to ship this out.
Whatever engineer it was,
I don't even know who it was, but
whatever engineer it was, just took my
code, took out all this code comments and
dropped it right into production.
And I told the QA department,
use a larger dataset.
Make sure that even with a larger dataset
than 15 that I had available to me,
fake some data, do something, but test it
with a larger data set to make sure that
the engineers have accounted for
the performance of this.
If somebody clicks on this thing,
that it's not just gonna hang or die, or
whatever.
It was kind of an important
screen that we were adding.
So guess how many test elements
the QA department used?
The exact same number as I did,
they used the 15 dataset.
I told them use hundreds or
thousands or something, just so
that you'll spot it if there's a
performance problem use something bigger.
Everybody along the line after
I had handed it off thought,
I can't imagine a customer of having
more than 15 elements in this table,
we will never have more than 15.
So they just used 15 because
they thought it was fixed at 15.
High profile feature,
we did a press release.
We launched it with our biggest client.
It crashes while the CEO is
doing a demo to his wife and
other shareholders, totally crashes.
And guess who got blamed?
Even though I said over and
over and over again,
this code is not ready
to go to production.
I'm not the engineer.
They still shipped that code
because it turns out that
that customer had 10,000
records in that table.
And he was like, look how cool
this is when I go to sort this.
It's just gonna sort real quick.
And it probably would have
taken 30 minutes to sort it,
if I'm doing the math correctly, okay?
So this stuff does matter,
it absolutely matters.
I got the blame.
Even though I had tried as much CYA as I
could possibly muster, I got the blame,
because I didn't make sure that QA
had done a large enough test dataset.
So anyway, this stuff matters.